Add Debezium 2.x docs (#1149)
hazelcast/hz-docs: docs/modules/integrate/pages/cdc-connectors.adoc

= CDC Connector
[.enterprise]*Enterprise*

> Change Data Capture (CDC) refers to the process of observing changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: This page refers to Hazelcast's {enterprise-product-name} CDC connectors. For more information on {open-source-product-name} CDC connectors, see xref:integrate:legacy-cdc-connectors.adoc[].

Change Data Capture (CDC) refers to the process of observing changes
```

processed by the Jet engine.

Implementation of CDC in Hazelcast {enterprise-product-name} is based on
link:https://debezium.io/[Debezium 2.x, window=_blank]. Hazelcast offers a generic Debezium source
which can handle CDC events from link:https://debezium.io/documentation/reference/2.7/connectors/index.html[any database supported by Debezium, window=_blank],
However, we're also striving to make CDC sources first class citizens in Hazelcast,
as we have done already for MySQL and PostgreSQL already are.

== Installing the Connector

This connector is included in the full distribution of Hazelcast {enterprise-product-name}.

=== Maven
To use this connector in a Maven project, add the following entries to the `<dependency>` section of your `pom.xml` file:

Generic connector:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.hazelcast.jet</groupId>
    <artifactId>hazelcast-enterprise-cdc-debezium</artifactId>
    <version>{full-version}</version>
</dependency>
----

MySQL-specific connector:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.hazelcast.jet</groupId>
    <artifactId>hazelcast-enterprise-cdc-mysql</artifactId>
    <version>{full-version}</version>
</dependency>
----

> NOTE: MySQL connector does not include the MySQL driver as a dependency.

Reviewer 2: My reaction as a user here would be

- why? -> explain it's due to licensing
- what do I do then? -> add the driver (mention the maven coordinates) to the classpath of the members.

Author: 47a11bf3dc949fe727cea8b5d2d084f3af00f9ba

* link:https://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/{full-version}/javadoc/com/hazelcast/enterprise/jet/cdc/mysql/MySqlCdcSources.html[MySqlCdcSources, window=_blank]:
  a specific, first class Jet CDC source for MySQL databases (also based
  on Debezium, but with the additional benefits provided by Hazelcast
* link:https://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/{full-version}/javadoc/com/hazelcast/enterprise/jet/cdc/postgres/PostgresCdcSources.html[PostgresCdcSources, window=_blank]:
  a specific, first class CDC source for PostgreSQL databases (also based
on Debezium, but with the additional benefits provided by Hazelcast

To set up a streaming source of CDC data, define it using the following configuration:

[source,java]
----
Pipeline pipeline = Pipeline.create();
pipeline.readFrom(
    MySqlCdcSources.mysql("customers")
            .setDatabaseAddress("127.0.0.1", 3306)
            .setDatabaseCredentials("debezium", "dbz")
            .setClusterName("dbserver1")
            .setDatabaseIncludeList("inventory")
            .setTableIncludeList("inventory.customers")
            .build())
    .withNativeTimestamps(0)
    .writeTo(Sinks.logger());
----

> MySQL- and PostgreSQL-specific source builders contain methods for all major configuration settings with protection if, for example, mutually exclusive options are not used. If using a generic source builder, refer to the link:https://debezium.io/documentation/reference/stable/index.html[Debezium, window=_blank] documentation

Reviewer 2: Is there a sample with the generic source?

Author: 47a11bf3dc949fe727cea8b5d2d084f3af00f9ba

for the _streaming of changes from databases_, which can be efficiently
processed by the Jet engine.

Implementation of CDC in Hazelcast {enterprise-product-name} is based on
link:https://debezium.io/[Debezium 2.x, window=_blank]. Hazelcast offers a generic Debezium source
which can handle CDC events from link:https://debezium.io/documentation/reference/2.7/connectors/index.html[any database supported by Debezium, window=_blank],
However, we're also striving to make CDC sources first class citizens in Hazelcast,
as we have done already for MySQL and PostgreSQL already are.

== Installing the Connector

This connector is included in the full distribution of Hazelcast {enterprise-product-name}.

=== Maven
To use this connector in a Maven project, add the following entries to the `<dependency>` section of your `pom.xml` file:

Generic connector:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.hazelcast.jet</groupId>
    <artifactId>hazelcast-enterprise-cdc-debezium</artifactId>
    <version>{full-version}</version>

>     <classifier>jar-with-dependencies</classifier>

Reviewer 2: I don't think any of the other connector docs refer to the `jar-with-dependencies`.

There is no right way to do it, but IMO using the non-fat jar causes the least issues.

Author: +1, https://github.com/hazelcast/hz-docs/pull/1149/commits/28df78e42650d78e9701476a3b37ca5c41c8e2ee

for the _streaming of changes from databases_, which can be efficiently
processed by the Jet engine.

> Implementation of CDC in Hazelcast {enterprise-product-name} is based on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The implementation of CDC in Hazelcast {enterprise-product-name} is based on
```

link:https://debezium.io/[Debezium 2.x, window=_blank]. Hazelcast offers a generic Debezium source
which can handle CDC events from link:https://debezium.io/documentation/reference/2.7/connectors/index.html[any database supported by Debezium, window=_blank],
However, we're also striving to make CDC sources first class citizens in Hazelcast,

> as we have done already for MySQL and PostgreSQL already are.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as we have done already for MySQL and PostgreSQL.
```

== Installing the Connector

This connector is included in the full distribution of Hazelcast {enterprise-product-name}.

=== Maven
To use this connector in a Maven project, add the following entries to the `<dependency>` section of your `pom.xml` file:

Generic connector:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.hazelcast.jet</groupId>
    <artifactId>hazelcast-enterprise-cdc-debezium</artifactId>
    <version>{full-version}</version>
</dependency>
----

MySQL-specific connector:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.hazelcast.jet</groupId>
    <artifactId>hazelcast-enterprise-cdc-mysql</artifactId>
    <version>{full-version}</version>
</dependency>
----

> NOTE: Due to licensing, MySQL connector does not include the MySQL driver as a dependency. You have to manually add dependency `com.mysql:mysql-connector-j` to the classpath.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: Due to licensing, MySQL connector does not include the MySQL driver as a dependency. You have to manually add the `com.mysql:mysql-connector-j` dependency to the classpath.
```

PostgreSQL-specific connector:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.hazelcast.jet</groupId>
    <artifactId>hazelcast-enterprise-cdc-postgres</artifactId>
    <version>{full-version}</version>
</dependency>
----

== CDC as a Source

The Java API supports the following types of CDC source:

* link:https://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/{full-version}/javadoc/com/hazelcast/enterprise/jet/cdc/DebeziumCdcSources.html[DebeziumCdcSources, window=_blank]:
  a generic source for all databases supported by Debezium
* link:https://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/{full-version}/javadoc/com/hazelcast/enterprise/jet/cdc/mysql/MySqlCdcSources.html[MySqlCdcSources, window=_blank]:
  a specific, first class Jet CDC source for MySQL databases (also based
  on Debezium, but with the additional benefits provided by Hazelcast
* link:https://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/{full-version}/javadoc/com/hazelcast/enterprise/jet/cdc/postgres/PostgresCdcSources.html[PostgresCdcSources, window=_blank]:
  a specific, first class CDC source for PostgreSQL databases (also based
on Debezium, but with the additional benefits provided by Hazelcast

> To set up a streaming source of CDC data, define it using the following configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To set up a CDC data streaming source, define it using the following configuration:
```

            .setClusterName("dbserver1")
            .setDatabaseIncludeList("inventory")
            .setTableIncludeList("inventory.customers")
            .build())
    .withNativeTimestamps(0)
    .writeTo(Sinks.logger());
----
--
PostgreSQL::
+
--
[source,java]
----
Pipeline pipeline = Pipeline.create();
pipeline.readFrom(
    PostgresCdcSources.postgres("customers")
            .setDatabaseAddress("127.0.0.1", 5432)
            .setDatabaseCredentials("debezium", "dbz")
            .setClusterName("dbserver1")
            .setDatabaseIncludeList("inventory")
            .setTableIncludeList("inventory.customers")
            .build())
    .withNativeTimestamps(0)
    .writeTo(Sinks.logger());
----
--
MongoDB::
+
--
[source,java]
----
Pipeline pipeline = Pipeline.create();
pipeline.readFrom(
    DebeziumCdcSources.debezium("customers", MongoDbConnector.class)
            .setProperty("mongodb.connection.string", "mongodb://localhost:27017")
            .setDatabaseIncludeList("inventory")
            .setProperty("collection.include.list", "customers")
            .build())
    .withNativeTimestamps(0)
    .writeTo(Sinks.logger());
----
--

====

> MySQL- and PostgreSQL-specific source builders contain methods for all major configuration settings with protection if, for example, mutually exclusive options are not used. If using a generic source builder, refer to the link:https://debezium.io/documentation/reference/stable/index.html[Debezium, window=_blank] documentation for the information about possible required or mutually exclusive fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MySQL- and PostgreSQL-specific source builders contain methods for all major configuration settings with protection if, for example, mutually exclusive options are not used. If using a generic source builder, refer to the link:https://debezium.io/documentation/reference/stable/index.html[Debezium, window=_blank] documentation for the information about required or mutually exclusive fields.
```

Follow the provided xref:pipelines:cdc.adoc[] tutorial to see how CDC processes change events from a MySQL database.

=== Common source builder functions
[cols="m,a"]
|===
|Method name|Description

|changeRecord()

> | Sets output type to `ChangeRecord` - a wrapper, which provides most of the fields in
> strongly-typed manner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Sets output type to `ChangeRecord` - a wrapper, which provides most of the fields in
a strongly-typed manner.
```

Reviewer: Not sure 'manner' is best word here...

| json()
| Sets output type to `JSON` - in the result stage, the type will be set to `Map<String, String>`,

> where map entry's key is the key of `SourceRecord` in JSON format and value is whole `SourceRecord`'s value in JSON format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where the map entry's key is the key of `SourceRecord` in JSON format, and the value is the whole `SourceRecord`'s value in JSON format.
```

|customMapping(RecordMappingFunction<T>)

> | Sets the output type to an arbitrary user type, `T`. Mapping from `SourceRecord` to `T` is done using provided function by the connector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Sets the output type to an arbitrary user type, `T`. Mapping from `SourceRecord` to `T` is done using the function provided by the connector.
```

|withDefaultEngine()
|Sets the preferred engine to the default (non-async) one. This engine is single-threaded,

> but also older and more tested. Use this engine for most stable results (for example, no async offset restore). For MySQL and PostgreSQL especially this engine makes the most sense, as MySQL and PostgreSQL Debezium connectors are single-threaded only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but also more widely used and tested. Use this engine for the most stable results (for example, no async offset restore). For MySQL and PostgreSQL especially this engine makes the most sense, as MySQL and PostgreSQL Debezium connectors are single-threaded only.
```

    <version>{full-version}</version>
</dependency>
----

MySQL-specific connector:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.hazelcast.jet</groupId>
    <artifactId>hazelcast-enterprise-cdc-mysql</artifactId>
    <version>{full-version}</version>
</dependency>
----
NOTE: Due to licensing, MySQL connector does not include the MySQL driver as a dependency. You have to manually add the `com.mysql:mysql-connector-j` dependency to the classpath.

PostgreSQL-specific connector:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.hazelcast.jet</groupId>
    <artifactId>hazelcast-enterprise-cdc-postgres</artifactId>
    <version>{full-version}</version>
</dependency>
----

== CDC as a Source

The Java API supports the following types of CDC source:

* link:https://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/{full-version}/javadoc/com/hazelcast/enterprise/jet/cdc/DebeziumCdcSources.html[DebeziumCdcSources, window=_blank]:
  a generic source for all databases supported by Debezium
* link:https://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/{full-version}/javadoc/com/hazelcast/enterprise/jet/cdc/mysql/MySqlCdcSources.html[MySqlCdcSources, window=_blank]:
  a specific, first class Jet CDC source for MySQL databases (also based

>   on Debezium, but with the additional benefits provided by Hazelcast

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  on Debezium, but with the additional benefits provided by Hazelcast)
```

* link:https://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/{full-version}/javadoc/com/hazelcast/enterprise/jet/cdc/postgres/PostgresCdcSources.html[PostgresCdcSources, window=_blank]:
  a specific, first class CDC source for PostgreSQL databases (also based

> on Debezium, but with the additional benefits provided by Hazelcast

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on Debezium, but with the additional benefits provided by Hazelcast)
```

[cols="m,a"]
|===
|Method name|Description

|changeRecord()
| Sets output type to ChangeRecord - a wrapper, providing most of the fields in
strongly-typed manner.

| json()
| Sets output type to JSON - result stage will have `Map<String, String>` as it's type,
where key is SourceRecord's key in json format and value is whole SourceRecord's value in json string.

|customMapping(RecordMappingFunction<T>)
| Sets output type to some arbitrary user type `T`. Mapping from `SourceRecord` to `T` will
be done using provided function.

|withDefaultEngine()
|Sets preferred engine to default (non-async) one. This engine is single-threaded,
but also older and more tested. For most stable results (e.g. no async offset restore) this engine should be preferred. For MySQL and PostgreSQL especially this engine makes the most sense, as MySQL and PostgreSQL Debezium connectors are single-threaded only.

|withAsyncEngine()
|Sets preferred engine to async one. This engine is multithreaded (if connector supports
it), but you must be aware of it's async nature, e.g. offset restore after restart is done
asynchronously as well, leading to sometimes confusing results.

|setProperty(String, String)

> |Sets connector property to given value. There are multiple overloads, allowing to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|Sets connector property to given value. As multiple overrides can be set, you can
```

Author: It changes semantics though - overloads means that it's the same method name, but with multiple possible (overloaded) parameter types, while override means some subclass changes implementation of super class

Reviewer 3: Updated the suggestion to re-instate overloads

> sets value to some `long`, `String` or `boolean`.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure about this one, "overloads" are not referred to elsewhere.

I have offered an alternative, but if I have not understood correctly, let me know!

> sets value to some `long`, `String` or `boolean`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
set the value to `long`, `String` or `boolean`.
```

|===

=== Fault Tolerance

CDC sources offer at least-once processing guarantees. The source
periodically saves the database write ahead log offset for which it had
dispatched events and in case of a failure/restart it will replay all
events since the last successfully saved offset.

> Unfortunately, however, there is no guaran`tee that the last saved offset

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, however, there is no guarantee that the last saved offset
```

maintaining a map view of latest known email addresses per customer
(identified by ID) would look like this:

[source,java]
----
Pipeline p = Pipeline.create();
p.readFrom(source)
 .withoutTimestamps()
 .writeTo(CdcSinks.map("customers",
    r -> r.key().toMap().get("id"),
    r -> r.value().toObject(Customer.class).email));
----

[NOTE]
====
The key and value functions have certain limitations. They can be used to map only to objects which the Hazelcast member can deserialize, which unfortunately doesn't include user code submitted as a part of the job. So in the above example it's OK to have `String` email values, but we wouldn't be able to use `Customer` directly.

If user code has to be used, then the problem can be solved with the help of the User Code Deployment feature. Example configs for that can be seen in our xref:pipelines:cdc-join.adoc#7-start-hazelcast-jet[CDC Join tutorial].
====

> == Migration Guide

Reviewer: Is this a guide or just tips?
If you were writing this a step by step guide, even high level steps, I would keep the Guide nomenclature but otherwise I would consider renaming this section i.e. I think we are overselling it as a guide.

Author: idea was to provide a guide, but TBH during writing of it I realised that it should be so simple, that detailed guide is not needed. Just needed to update the title, which I forgot ;)

> Hazelcast {open-source-product-name} has Debezium CDC connector, however it is based on older version of Debezium.
> While migrating to the new connector should be very simple, there are some things users should remember:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hazelcast {open-source-product-name} has a Debezium CDC connector but it's based on an older version of Debezium.
Migration to the new connector is straightforward but be aware of the following changes:
```

>  * Package was changed from `com.hazelcast.jet.cdc` to `com.hazelcast.enterprise.jet.cdc`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Package renamed from `com.hazelcast.jet.cdc` to `com.hazelcast.enterprise.jet.cdc`
```
Is it just a rename or a change of package?

Author: Hard to say if it makes a difference in this context - old connector has old package new, new connector has new package name (changed/renamed)

Reviewer: Yeah, I thought that - probably better with:
```suggestion
 * You should use the `com.hazelcast.enterprise.jet.cdc` package instead of `com.hazelcast.jet.cdc`.
```

 * Artifact names are now `hazelcast-enterprise-cdc-debezium`, `hazelcast-enterprise-cdc-mysql` and `hazelcast-enterprise-cdc-postgres` (instead of `hazelcast-jet-...`).

>  * Debezium replaced all `whitelist`s with `include list`s and `blacklist`s with `exclude list`s, Hazelcast for consistency followed the same naming structure and instead of e.g. `setTableWhitelist` you need to use `setTableIncludeList` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Debezium replaced all `whitelist`s with `include list`s and `blacklist`s with `exclude list`s, which we have replicated in our naming; so, for example, use `setTableIncludeList` instead of `setTableWhitelist`.
```
Do we expect users to look at the code or API docs or somewhere else to see/confirm these new names?
